FG syndrome is a rare X-linked recessive form of mental retardation, first described by Opitz and Kaveggia in 1974. Based on over 50 reported cases, FG syndrome is associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum, minor facial anomalies (high, broad forehead with frontal cowlick, ocular hypertelorism, down-slanted palpebral fissures, and small cupped auricles), relative macrocephaly, broad thumbs and halluces, and prominent fetal fingertip pads. Affected individuals manifest neonatal hypotonia and severe constipation, which usually resolves during mid-childhood. The hypotonia with joint hyperlaxity evolves into spasticity with joint contractures in later life. Affability, hyperactivity, and excessive talkativeness are noted frequently in patients with FG syndrome. Recently, we described three additional families (six additional patients) with FG syndrome who support the localization of a gene for the FG syndrome in chromosome region Xq12-q21 [Graham JM Jr, Tackels D, Dibbern K, Superneau D, Rodgers C, Corning K, Schwartz CE. 1998. Am J Med Genet 80:145-156.]. Using these same families and one additional sporadic case of FG syndrome, we compared behavioral and personality characteristics of 6 FG boys with other boys with syndromic and nonsyndromic mental retardation: eight with Down syndrome, seven with Prader-Willi syndrome, eight with nonspecific mental retardation, and 13 with Williams syndrome. Using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, the Reiss Personality Profiles, and the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist, parents were asked to characterize the behavior and personality of their boys from ages 4 to 10 years. When compared with Williams syndrome, the FG boys had fewer internalizing behaviors and were significantly less anxious and withdrawn but had similar socially oriented, attention-seeking behaviors. On the Reiss Profile, FG boys were also quite similar to Williams syndrome boys. On the Vineland Scales, FG boys demonstrated significant relative strengths in their socialization skills, consistent with their personality, tending to confirm previous descriptions of their personalities.