Rapid progress in human genome decoding has accelerated search for the role of gene polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of complex multifactorial diseases. This review summarizes the results of recent studies on the associations of common gene variants with multifactorial chronic conditions strongly affected by nutritional factors. Three main individual sections discuss genes related to energy homeostasis regulation and obesity, cardiovascular disease (CVD), and cancer. It is evident that several major chronic diseases are closely related (often through obesity) to deregulation of energy homeostasis. Multiple polymorphic genes encoding central and peripheral determinants of energy intake and expenditure have been revealed over the past decade. Food intake control may be affected by polymorphisms in the genes encoding taste receptors and a number of peripheral signaling peptides such as insulin, leptin, ghrelin, cholecystokinin, and corresponding receptors. Polymorphic central regulators of energy intake include hypothalamic neuropeptide Y, agouti-related protein, melanocortin pathway factors, CART (cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript), some other neuropeptides, and receptors for these molecules. Potentially important polymorphisms in the genes encoding energy expenditure modulators (alpha- and beta- adrenoceptors, uncoupling proteins, and regulators of adipocyte growth and differentiation) are also discussed. CVD-related gene polymorphisms comprising those involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, blood pressure regulation, hemostasis control, and homocysteine metabolism are considered in a separate section with emphasis on multiple polymorphisms affecting lipid transport and metabolism and their interactions with diet. Cancer-associated polymorphisms are discussed for groups of genes encoding enzymes of xenobiotic metabolism, DNA repair enzymes, factors involved in the cell cycle control, hormonal regulation-associated proteins, enzymes related to DNA methylation through folate metabolism, and angiogenesis-related factors. There is an apparent progress in the field with hundreds of new gene polymorphisms discovered and characterized, however firm evidence consistently linking them with pathogenesis of complex chronic diseases is still limited. Ways of improving the efficiency of candidate gene approach-based studies are discussed in a short separate section. Successful unraveling of interaction between dietary factors, polymorphisms, and pathogenesis of several multifactorial diseases is exemplified by studies of folate metabolism in relation to CVD and cancer. It appears that several new directions emerge as targets of research on the role of genetic variation in relation to diet and complex chronic diseases. Regulation of energy homeostasis is a fundamental problem insufficiently investigated in this context so far. Impacts of genetic variation on systems controlling angiogenesis, inflammatory reactions, and cell growth and differentiation (comprising regulation of the cell cycle, DNA repair, and DNA methylation) are also largely unknown and need thorough analysis. These goals can be achieved by complex simultaneous analysis of multiple polymorphic genes controlling carefully defined and selected elements of relevant metabolic and regulatory pathways in meticulously designed large-scale studies.