Background:Adipose tissue is critical for systemic metabolic health. Identifying key factors regulating adipose tissue function is a research priority. The NR4A subfamily of nuclear receptors (NRs) (NR4A1/NUR77, NR4A2/NURR1 and NR4A3/NOR1) has emerged as important proteins in different disease states and in the regulation of metabolic tissues, particularly in liver and muscle. However, the expression of the NR4A members in human adipose tissue has not previously been described, and their target genes are largely unknown.Objective:To determine whether the NR4As are differentially expressed in human adipose tissue in obesity, and identify potential NR4A target genes.Design:Prospective analysis of s.c. adipose tissue before and 1 year after fat loss, and during in vitro differentiation of primary human preadipocytes. Case-control comparison of omental (OM) adipose tissue.Subjects:A total of 13 extremely obese patients undergoing biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch for fat loss, 12 extremely obese patients undergoing laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and 37 lean individuals undergoing hernia repair or laparotomy were included in the study. Measurements were done by quantitative PCR gene expression analysis of the NR4A members and in silico promoter analysis based on microarray data.Results:There was a strong upregulation of the NR4As in extreme obesity and normalization after fat loss. The NR4As were expressed at the highest level in stromal-vascular fraction compared with adipocytes, but were downregulated in both fractions after fat loss. Their expression levels were also significantly higher in OM compared with s.c. adipocytes in obesity. The NR4As were downregulated during differentiation of primary human preadipocytes. Moreover, the NR4As were strongly induced within 30 min of tissue incubation. Finally, promoter analysis revealed potential NR4A target genes involved in stress response, immune response, development and other functions. Our data show altered adipose tissue expression of the NR4As in obesity, suggesting that these stress responsive nuclear receptors may modulate pathogenic potential in humans.International Journal of Obesity advance online publication, 6 December 2011; doi:10.1038/ijo.2011.240.