Insulin resistance is a characteristic feature of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, but it is also present in up to 25% of healthy nonobese individuals. The molecular mechanisms causing insulin resistance are not yet fully understood. Recently, overexpression of several potential inhibitors of the insulin receptor tyrosine-kinase activity, a key step in insulin signaling, has been described in insulin-resistant subjects . PC-1 is expressed in many tissues and inhibits insulin signaling either at the level of the insulin receptor or downstream at a postreceptor site. An elevated PC-1 content in insulin target tissues may play an important role in the development of insulin resistance in obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. A polymorphism in PC-1 has been demonstrated to be associated with insulin resistance. This was a DNA polymorphism in exon 4 that causes an amino acid change from lysine to glutamine at codon 121 (K121Q). PC-1 121Q allele might predispose independently of other well established risk factors for early myocardial infarction. Testing for the PC-1 K121Q polymorphism might be valuable in patients with a family history of atherosclerotic vascular disease and myocardial infarction. There is growing evidence that genetic factors play an important role in the development of diabetic nephropathy (DN). Efforts to identify these factors rely primarily on the candidate gene approach; candidate genes for insulin resistance may be considered candidates for DN as well. In a stratified analysis according to duration of diabetes, the risk of early-onset end-stage renal disease (ESRD) for carriers of the Q variant was 2.3 times that for noncarriers. The cellular mechanisms for the insulin resistance of pregnancy and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are unknown. Women with GDM have an increased PC-1 content and excessive phosphorylation of serine/threonine residues in muscle insulin receptors. The postreceptor defects in insulin signaling may contribute to the pathogenesis of GDM and the increased risk for type 2 diabetes later in life. Although widely explored, the true cause of insulin resistance in uremic patients is not entirely elucidated yet. During the last decade it was found that erythropoietin (EPO) therapy, used for correction of anemia in patients with end stage renal failure, ameliorates insulin resistance. An increased lymphocyte PC-1 activity over control was found in hemodialysis patients. A two-month EPO therapy significantly decreased PC-1 activity to the control values, suggesting that an effect on PC-1 expression could be implicated in the amelioration of insulin resistance in uremic patients treated with EPO. Current investigations implicate that therapeutic modification of PC-1 expression would be of great benefit for insulin-resistant type 2 diabetics. Metformin, a biguanide oral antidiabetic agent, was shown to affect insulin resistance by decreasing enzymatic activity of overexpressed PC-1 molecules in obese type 2 diabetics. Thiazolidinedione (TZD) insulin-sensitizing drugs are a class of compounds that improve insulin action in vivo. Treatment of patients with TZDs seems to have a beneficial effect on most, if not all, components of metabolic syndrome. TZDs have also been used in the treatment of nondiabetic human insulin-resistant states, and have demonstrated an improvement in insulin sensitivity. Although much remains to be learned about PPAR gamma receptor and TZD action, the advent of TZD insulin-sensitizing agents has an enormous impact on our understanding of insulin resistance. The great potential of insulin resistance therapy illuminated by the TZDs will continue to catalyze research in this area directed toward the discovery of new insulin-sensitizing agents that work through other mechanisms.