The effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2 (PPAR gamma 2) Pro12Ala (P12A) polymorphism on body mass index (BMI) and type 2 diabetes are well documented; however, until now, only a few studies have evaluated the effects of this polymorphism on body fat distribution. This study was conducted to elucidate the effects of this polymorphism on computed tomography (CT)-measured body fat distribution and other obesity-related parameters in Korean female subjects. The frequencies of PPAR gamma 2 genotypes were: PP type, 93.0%; PA type, 6.8%; and AA type, 0.2%. The frequency of the A allele was 0.035. Body weight (P = .012), BMI (P = .012), and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) (P = .001) were significantly higher in subjects with PA/AA compared with subjects with PP. When body composition was analyzed by bioimpedance analysis, lean body mass and body water content were similar between the 2 groups. However, body fat mass (P = .003) and body fat percent (P = .025) were significantly higher in subjects with PA/AA compared with subjects with PP. Among overweight subjects with BMI of greater than 25, PA/AA was associated with significantly higher abdominal subcutaneous fat (P = .000), abdominal visceral fat (P = .031), and subcutaneous upper and lower thigh adipose tissue (P = .010 and .013). However, among lean subjects with BMI of less than 25, no significant differences associated with PPAR gamma 2 genotype were found, suggesting that the fat-accumulating effects of the PA/AA genotype were evident only among overweight subjects, but not among lean subjects. When serum lipid profiles, glucose, and liver function indicators were compared among overweight subjects, no significant difference associated with PPAR gamma 2 genotype was found. Changes in body weight, BMI, WHR, and body fat mass were measured among overweight subjects who finished a 1-month weight lose program of a hypocaloric diet and exercise; no significant differences associated with PPAR gamma 2 genotype were found. The results of this study suggest that the PPAR gamma 2 PA/AA genotype is associated with increased subcutaneous and visceral fat areas in overweight Korean female subjects, but does not significantly affect serum biochemical parameters and outcomes of weight loss programs.