The dyslipidemic state of visceral obesity is characterized by increased plasma triglyceride levels, low high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol concentration and alterations in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) composition and concentration. A functional, non-coding microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) -493G/T polymorphism of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene has been related to variations in LDL-cholesterol levels. To study the effect of the MTP -493G/T polymorphism on lipoprotein levels in visceral obesity and hyperinsulinemia, a total of 227 men were assigned into two groups on the basis of their MTP -493G/T polymorphism, including 121 GG homozygotes and 105 carriers of the T allele (92 GT and 13 TT). The two genotypic groups did not differ for their physiological characteristics nor for lipoprotein--lipid profiles, before and after adjustment for age. However, GG homozygotes were characterized by higher fasting insulin levels than carriers of the T allele (P&lt;0.05). When the two genotypic groups were further divided on the basis of their visceral adipose tissue (AT) accumulation, assessed by computed tomography, we observed that T allele carriers with low levels of visceral AT (&lt;130 cm(2)) had decreased plasma total cholesterol and LDL-apolipoprotein B (LDL-apoB) levels compared to viscerally obese men (P=0.035 and P=0.0001, respectively). Among GG homozygotes, no significant difference were observed. Although not significant, T allele carriers characterized by visceral obesity tended to have smaller, denser LDL particles than T allele carriers characterized by a low accumulation of visceral AT. When subjects were divided on the basis of their fasting insulin levels, it appears that hyperinsulinemic men were characterized by a deteriorated lipoprotein--lipid profile when they were carriers of the T allele compared to normoinsulinemic men. In summary, visceral obesity and hyperinsulinemia modulate the impact of the MTP -493G/T polymorphism on plasma total cholesterol and LDL-apoB levels, as well as on LDL peak particle diameter.