Uncoupling proteins (UCPs) are mitochondrial membrane transporters which are involved in dissipating the proton electrochemical gradient thereby releasing stored energy as heat. This implies a major role of UCPs in energy metabolism and thermogenesis which when deregulated are key risk factors for the development of obesity and other eating disorders. From the three different human UCPs identified so far by gene cloning both UCP2 and UCP3 were mapped in close proximity (75-150 kb) to regions of human chromosome 11 (11q13) that have been linked to obesity and hyperinsulinaemia. At the amino acid level hUCP2 has about 55% identity to hUCP1 while hUCP3 is 71% identical to hUCP2. In this study we have deduced the genomic structure of the human UCP2 gene by PCR and direct sequence analysis. The hUCP2 gene spans over 8.7 kb distributed on 8 exons. The localization of the exon/intron boundaries within the coding region matches precisely that of the hUCP1 gene and is almost conserved in the recently discovered hUCP3 gene as well. The high degree of homology at the nucleotide level and the conservation of the exon /intron boundaries among the three UCP genes suggests that they may have evolved from a common ancestor or are the result from gene duplication events. Mutational analysis of the hUCP2 gene in a cohort of 172 children (aged 7 - 13) of Caucasian origin revealed a polymorphism in exon 4 (C to T transition at position 164 of the cDNA resulting in the substitution of an alanine by a valine at codon 55) and an insertion polymorphism in exon 8. The insertion polymorphism consists of a 45 bp repeat located 150 bp downstream of the stop codon in the 3'-UTR. The allele frequencies were 0.63 and 0.37 for the alanine and valine encoded alleles, respectively, and 0.71 versus 0.29 for the insertion polymorphism. The allele frequencies of both polymorphisms were not significantly elevated in a subgroup of 25 children characterized by low Resting Metabolic Rates (RMR). So far a direct correlation of the observed genotype with (RMR) and Body Mass Index (BMI) was not evident. Expression studies of the wild type and mutant forms of UCP2 should clarify the functional consequences these polymorphisms may have on energy metabolism and body weight regulation.