Although elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol is a well established coronary heart disease (CHD) risk factor, the ability to adequately discriminate high-risk individuals by this risk factor alone is limited and other metabolic risk variables are known to modulate CHD risk. For instance, it has been reported that the cluster of metabolic disturbances observed among individuals with abdominal obesity, the so-called metabolic syndrome, is associated with a substantially increased risk of CHD. Among the features of the dyslipidaemic profile observed in these individuals, the high triglyceride-low high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol dyslipidaemia is predictive of an elevated risk of CHD. Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates) have been used in clinical practice for more than 2 decades as a class of agents known to decrease triglyceride levels while substantially increasing HDL-cholesterol levels, with a limited but significant additional lowering effect on LDL-cholesterol levels. Although the clinical benefits of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) have been well documented by primary and secondary prevention trials that justify their widespread use, it was not until the publication of the VA-HIT (Veterans Affairs High-Density Lipoprotein Intervention Trial) that the relevance of identifying HDL-cholesterol as a therapeutic target to reduce the risk of recurrent CHD events was finally confirmed. The clinical benefits of fibrate therapy are especially important in the subpopulation of patients with low HDL-cholesterol levels with the metabolic syndrome, particularly in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus or in abdominally obese, hyperinsulinaemic patients. Evidence also suggests that there is a 'fibrate effect' that mediates the reduction in CHD risk beyond the favourable impact of these agents on HDL-cholesterol levels. This last notion is consistent with the pleiotropic effects of fibrates which are known to be related to their mechanisms of action. Through peroxisome proliferator-activated alpha-receptors, fibrates have a significant impact on the synthesis of several apolipoproteins (apo) and enzymes of lipoprotein metabolism as well as on the expression of several genes involved in fibrinolysis and inflammation. Fibrate therapy has been reported to decrease apo CIII levels (a powerful inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase) and increase apo AI levels, as well as to increase lipoprotein lipase activity. Such changes contribute to improve the catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, leading to a substantial increase in HDL-cholesterol levels accompanied by a shift in the size and density of LDL particles (from small, dense LDL particles to larger, more buoyant cholesteryl ester-rich LDL). It is proposed that some of these pleiotropic effects could explain some of the clinical benefits of fibrate therapy beyond its HDL-raising properties, particularly among patients with abdominal obesity, hyperinsulinaemia or type 2 diabetes with both low HDL- and low/normal LDL-cholesterol levels.