Autosomal dominantly inherited isolated GH deficiency is caused by mutations of GH-1 that alter the normal structure of GH. We studied 16 familial cases and 1 sporadic case with isolated GH deficiency type II from 1 Dutch and 4 German families by direct sequencing of PCR-amplified genomic DNA and ectopic transcript analysis of lymphocyte mRNA. In addition, the clinical data of the affected individuals were analyzed. Two previously reported mutations and 1 novel splice site mutation in intron III of GH-1 (+1G to C and +1G to A; new, +2T to C) were detected that cause exon 3 skipping. We also discovered a novel G6191 to T missense mutation in exon 4 of GH-1 that changes valine 110, which is highly conserved in mammalian and several nonmammalian GH, to phenylalanine. Splicing of the primary RNA transcript was not affected by this mutation, which is very likely to alter the normal GH structure at the protein level. The onset of growth failure was earlier, and the degree was more severe in affected children with GH-1 splice site mutations compared with those in children with the GH-1 missense mutation. In addition, the severity of the phenotype was variable, even within the same family. The age at diagnosis was between 0.8-9.6 yr (median, 5.1 yr); height at diagnosis was between -2.5 and -8.1 SD score (median, -4.0). Most of the children were lean at diagnosis, with a body mass index ranging from -1.7 to +3.3 SD score (median, -0.5). The 5 affected adults had final heights between -1.8 and -4.5 SD score (median, -3.6), centripetal obesity, and muscular hypotrophy. Before therapy, IGF-I and IGF-binding protein-3 serum levels of all affected children were severely diminished (&lt;5th percentiles for age). The maximum GH peak in a total of 25 stimulation tests was between 0.1-5.0 microg/liter (median, 0.9), indicating severe GH deficiency. The height of the adenohypophysis studied by magnetic resonance imaging was normal in 2 affected children and mildly decreased in 2 others. Substitution with GH resulted in good catch-up growth in all treated children. Children with severe GH and IGF-I deficiencies, but normal size of the adenohypophysis should be examined for GH-1 splice site and missense mutations. The observed discrepancy between the very homogeneous hormone data proving severe GH and IGF-I deficiencies and the high variability of growth failure even within the same family suggests that the onset and predominance of GH-dependent growth during infancy are individually different and modified by as yet unknown factors.