AIM OF THE STUDY: Heart failure is the final clinical presentation of a variety of cardiovascular diseases, such as coronary artery disease, hypertensive, toxic, and inflammatory heart disease. However, the cellular mechanisms responsible for the progressive deterioration of myocardial function observed in heart failure remain unclear and may result from cell death (programmed or not) and from an increase in number of nuclei and in the degree of their ploidy. METHODS: We examined thirty-eight explanted hearts obtained during transplantation for DNA content in the myocytic population. All thirty-eight patients had severe chronic heart failure: 23 had idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, and 15 had ischemic cardiomyopathy. Ten hearts of people whose death was not due to primary heart disease or as a consequence of major risk factors of coronary artery disease, including hypertension, diabetes, obesity, or severe atherosclerosis, were used as controls. DNA content in the myocytic population was evaluated using Image Cytometry. RESULTS: The DNA content per nucleus and per myocyte in cardiomyopathic hearts are characterized by: a) a decrease of the diploid DNA content of myocytic nuclei; b) an increase of DNA ploidies higher than 4c; c) a decrease in mononucleated myocytes; d) an increase in binucleated and multinucleated myocytes. The changes are more prominent in dilated cardiomyopathy. e) The total ploidy index, used to calculate the total DNA content, is related to heart weight and ventricular weight. CONCLUSIONS: Ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathies result in reduction of ventricular mass-to-chamber volume ratio and in discrete foci of myocyte cell death, leading to an elevation in systolic and diastolic stress on the remaining viable cells. Therefore mechanical stimuli generated by global and local loading abnormalities associated with end-stage failure may contribute to activate genes implicated in cell proliferation. Observations in this investigation are consistent with recent results documenting that in the presence of overload conditions the myocytes may retain their capacity to proliferate throughout life and this growth reserve mechanism may become operative in response to severe myocardial dysfuntion and overt failure. Polyploidization and multinucleation are prominent phenomena in the end-stage of ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy in humans.